@c -*-texinfo-*-

@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

@subsection Required software

@itemize @bullet

@item gnustep-guile	@*
Available from
@url{ftp://ftp.gnustep.org/pub/gnustep/libs}. 

@item guile-1.4		@*
Should be available from any GNU ftp site @*
NB. guile 1.3 contains bugs that prevent gnustep-guile from working fully.

@item gnustep-core-@value{GNUSTEP-VERSION}	@*
Available from 
@url{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gnustep} or see
@url{http://www.gnustep.org/} for further information.

@item gcc-2.8.*@*
Gcc should be available from any GNU ftp site @*
You may also use a recent version of egcs. @*
NB. For debugging, you need gdb-4.17 with the objc patch.
The patch for gdb-4.17 is available at
@url{ftp://alpha.gnu.org/gnu/gnustep/contrib/} @*

@end itemize


@subsection Build and Install

@itemize @bullet

@item Make sure you have gcc-2.8.* installed.

@item Make sure you have Guile-1.3.4 or later built and installed.
This library has been tested with 1.4 and 1.3.4.
The library does not work fully with Guile-1.3

@item Make sure you have gnustep-make and gnustep-base version 0.9.2 or better
installed and have your account properly set up to use GNUstep.sh from
the gnustep-make package to set up your environment.

@item Run the @samp{configure} script.

@item To build the entire gnustep-guile package, simply type 'make'

@item To install - become root and type 'make install'
The installation process will copy the library into place and will also
copy Guile scripts into place.

@item To test it - type 'make check'.@*
This will use the 'go' program (built in the Test directory) to run the
tests in 'Test/tests'.@*
Alternatively - you can run the 'go' program directly and work interactively.

@end itemize


@subsection Trouble

This package has only been used by me on a GNU/Linux/Intel system -
I would love to hear about success/failures on other systems.

Likely problems -

@itemize @bullet
@item
If you install gnustep-guile in a non-standard location, it's possible that
guile will not be able to find the dynamic libraries to load them.
In this case, you will need to change/set the @code{LD_LIBRARY_PATH}
environment variable (or whatever other environment variable your operating
system uses to list the places in which dynamic libraries may be found) to
include the directory in which the libraries have been installed.
@item
Structure return is might fail on other systems. Check the portability 
of the ffcall library if you experience problems.
If ffcall doesn't work, getting a working
system for your machine/operatins system is likely to be quite tricky.
@end itemize

Try to fix the problem.  Send patches to <richard@@brainstorm.co.uk>.


